AST5210 Spring semester 2020.


1. Basic concepts

What units are common for opacity? intensity? emissivity?  Explain in
words the meaning of opacity, absorption, scattering, emissivity, mean
intensity, source function, optical depth. Why is it practical to
define the source function? Interpret the different terms in the
equation of radiative transfer.

Give the solution of the transfer equation for a homogeneous slab,
small optical depth.  Give the formal solution for the outgoing
intensity for a semi-infinite 1D atmosophere. Describe in words the
origin of the two factors inside the integral.

What is the Eddington-Barbier relation?


2. Numerical integration

Explain numerical integration (quadrature). Trapezoidal and Simpson
methods, Gaussian quadrature, Gauss-Legendre, Gauss-Laguerre


3. Source function with scattering

Explain why there are two terms in the source function when scattering
is considered.  Describe some methods of direct integration of the
formal solution.  When can direct integration be employed? What is
lambda iteration?  Why does lambda iteration fail when scattering
dominates? Give some cases when scattering dominates the opacity. What
is shooting?


4. Feautrier

Why is it possible to use Feautrier's method to solve the transfer
equation with scattering present? What is the basic difference between
Feautrier's method and a direct integration? Outline the basic steps
in the Feautrier method.


5. ALI

Explain the principles behind Accelerated Lambda iteration (ALI).
What is Sharmer's method? Olson-Auer-Buchler operator?


6. Convergence acceleration

Explain the basic principle behind Ng acceleration (full derivation not necessary).


7. Linearization

Explain linearization, Newton-Raphson, convergence radius.  Specify
the two operator perturbation steps (1. error(n)=?  2. delta(x)(n)=?)
resulting from linearization of the following equations:

a) x^3 = 2
b) 4*x^2 + x*y + y^2 = 16
   2*x + x*y^2 = 9


8. non-LTE

How is the number density of the different energy levels in an atom
determined in LTE? in non-LTE? Why is non-LTE so much more
complicated?  Relate locality/non-locality to LTE/non-LTE. How is the
coupling between variables in the two cases? When can we expect LTE to
be a good approximation? Where in a stellar atmosphere do we expect
such conditions?

What processes are involved in the statistical equilibrium?  Describe
how the radiative transfer and the statistical equilibrium couple.
Describe the principles of linearizing the statistical equilibrium
equations.  Why don't we get any linearization terms from collisional
rates? What is the complication caused by the radiation? How do we
eliminate the perturbation in intensity from the statistical
equilbrium equations?
